Binary caching troubleshooting guide (#152)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/users/binarycaching-troubleshooting.md

---
title: Binary caching troubleshooting guide
description: Troubleshooting your binary caching setup
author: dan-shaw
ms.author: danshaw2
ms.date: 9/20/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
---

# Binary caching troubleshooting guide

This guide is intended for vcpkg binary caching users that are running into unexpected behavior from this experience. Please review the [binary caching](./binarycaching.md) reference documentation for a basic understanding of what this feature does and how it works.

> ## Set up vcpkg to print debugging information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## <a name="debug-output"></a> Set up vcpkg to print debugging information
```

Debug mode outputs information such as the compiler verison and ABI hashes, which will help us to diagnose any binary caching issues.

* [Classic mode](./classic-mode.md): add `--debug` to your command invocation.

> * CMake toolchain: set `-DVCPKG_INSTALL_OPTIONS="--debug"` in your `cmake` command call or in your `CMakePresets.json` file.

Reviewer 2: I think this is OK but I also think we need an outstanding item to fix the product such that the user can do most of this without needing to turn our development debug spew.

In particular, the development debug spew is not localized.

Author: Agreed, that will be helpful

* MSBuild/Visual Studio: set the property `VcpkgAdditionalInstallOptions` to `--debug`

## Troubleshooting binary caching configuration issues

There are many choices for a binary caching provider including AWS, NuGet, Azure. While each provider will have its own error messages, we expect the type of error and the actual fix will be the same across all providers. We will walk through a specific example of using NuGet as a binary cache provider.

> ### Binary package ABI

Reviewer: This is helping the user understand our debug output. It should merge into the debugging information section instead of being in the "Problem -> Solution" section.

Author: I've restructured the entire page based on what we discussed offline.

> The full Application Binary Interface (ABI) of the binary package is in the debug output. For example, for zlib:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For each binary package artifact, vcpkg calculates an ABI hash (Application Binary Interface). The ABI hash is then used as a key to refer to that particular binary artifact. If any changes occur in the package, its ABI hash its changed too.

In debug mode, the output includes the full ABI hash of each package.
For example, for package `zlib`:
```

We should preamble with why vcpkg calculates an ABI hash.

Author: added a link instead

```
[DEBUG] Trying to hash <path>\buildtrees\zlib\x86-windows.vcpkg_abi_info.txt
[DEBUG] <path>\buildtrees\zlib\x86-windows.vcpkg_abi_info.txt has hash bb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87
```

> The ABI hash `bb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87` for package zlib is constructed by hashing all the possible relevant information (sources, compiler information) to distinguish binary packages. The binary cache provider uses this as a key to refer to the binary package artifact. If this hash were to change between runs for the same package, it would mean some part of the package had changed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ABI hash for `zlib` when installed for the `x86-windows` triplet is `bb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87` (the ABI hash you get may be different). The ABI hash is constructed by calculating the hash of the corresponding `vcpkg_abi_info.txt` file. The file itself, contains a list of hash values of every setting that can affect the resulting binary artifact, for example:  source files, applied patches, ABI hashes of dependencies, compiler information, etc.
```

Reviewer 3: Alternatively (and probably better), we could link to this information in the reference documentation and just focus on the troubleshooting in this article.

> ### Creating the binary package

Reviewer: What does failure look like? The user is going to paste error messages into their search engine.

A successful creation of the binary package should output:
```
[DEBUG] 1010: CreateProcessW("<path>\downloads\tools\nuget-6.2.1-windows\nuget.exe" pack -ForceEnglishOutput -Verbosity detailed -NonInteractive "<path>\buildtrees\zlib\x86-windows.nuspec" -OutputDirectory "<path>\buildtrees" -NoDefaultExcludes)
[DEBUG] 1010: cmd_execute_and_stream_data() returned 0 after  1038094 us
...
Successfully created package '<path>\buildtrees\zlib_x86-windows.1.2.13-vcpkgbb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87.nupkg'.
```
If you are not seeing this message, consider the following:

> * Make sure `CreateProcessW` returns a successful exit code `0` when compressing the package into an artifact

Reviewer: (For the future, not required for this PR) What about on Linux / MacOS?

Author: I've removed this section, and I don't think the other sections are platform specific

> * Make sure `CreateProcessW` returns a successful exit code `0` when compressing the package into an artifact

Reviewer 2: How is the user supposed to do that?

Author: I removed this section based on feedback

* Make sure you have enough disk space on your machine

### Failing to write to the binary cache

> A successful write to the binary cache should have the following output for each dependency:

Reviewer: What does failure look like?

```
[DEBUG] 1011: CreateProcessW("<path>\downloads\tools\nuget-6.2.1-windows\nuget.exe" push -ForceEnglishOutput -Verbosity detailed -NonInteractive "<path>\buildtrees\zlib_x86-windows.1.2.13-vcpkgbb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87.nupkg" -Timeout 100 -Source <NuGet Feed>)
[DEBUG] 1011: cmd_execute_and_stream_data() returned 0 after   767027 us
NuGet Version: 6.2.1.2
Pushing zlib_x86-windows.1.2.13-vcpkgbb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87.nupkg to '<NuGet Feed>'...
Your package was pushed.
Stored binaries in 1 destinations in 1.8 s.
```

Your NuGet feed or cache should look something like this:
```
Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
----                 -------------         ------ ----
-a---           8/16/2023  8:53 PM         529044 zlib_x86-windows.1.2.13-vcpkgbb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87.nupkg
```

If writing to the cache is failing, consider the following:

> * Make sure your binary source has `write` permissions

Reviewer: This wording is potentially confusing -- at the vcpkg configuration level, `readwrite` isn't a permission.

```suggestion
* Make sure your [binary cache configuration](binarycaching.md#configuration-syntax) is set to `write` or `readwrite`
```

* Make sure you are correctly authenticating to your provider. This may mean your authentication token has correct permissions, or, for cloud environments, you may need to run a tool to authenticate
* Make sure `CreateProcessW` returns a successful exit code when pushing

### Failing to read from the binary cache

> A successful reuse of a stored binary package should output:

Reviewer: What does failure look like?

```
[DEBUG] 1008: CreateProcessW("<path>\downloads\tools\nuget-6.2.1-windows\nuget.exe" install -ForceEnglishOutput -Verbosity detailed -NonInteractive "<path>\buildtrees\packages.config" -OutputDirectory "<path>\packages" -ExcludeVersion -PreRelease -PackageSaveMode nupkg -DirectDownload -NoCache -Source <NuGet Feed>)
[DEBUG] 1008: cmd_execute_and_stream_data() returned 0 after  1168243 us
...
Restored 1 package(s) from NuGet in 1.2 s. Use --debug to see more details.
```

> If the ABI of your package is the same between runs, make sure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If vcpkg is failing to read packages, consider the following:
```

Author: I think I removed this section

> * Your binary source has `read` permissions

Reviewer: See above comment about `write`

* You are correctly authenticating to your provider. This may mean your authentication token has correct permissions or for cloud environments, you may need to run a tool to authenticate

> 
> If the ABI hash of your package differs between runs, see the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the [debug output](#debug-output), observe the ABI hash for the package and make sure the hash is present in the binary cache.
```

> ## Fixing your binary cache setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshooting ABI hash mismatch
```

Author: I moved this section, but I changed the title to `Troubleshoot why two packages have different ABI hashes`. Not sure which is more clear

> If you have correctly configured binary caching for both reads and writes but vcpkg is sometimes or always rebuilding your libraries instead of using existing cached binaries, read on.

Reviewer: Consider lifting as much of this prose as possible to the top section (Debug output, how to get it, how to read it).

> If your vcpkg binary cache is constantly rebuilding, it's important to figure out what changed in your [ABI hash](./binarycaching.md#abi-hash). Suppose we are building `zlib` for `x86-windows`. What information in the debug output is relevant?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your vcpkg binary cache is constantly rebuilding, it's important to figure out what changed in your [ABI hash](./binarycaching.md#abi-hash).
```
Avoid rhetorical questions in How-To & Troubleshooting; the objective is to solve problems as efficiently as possible and not to educate or inspire.

> The version of your compiler is part of the ABI hash. You can find it in the debug output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The version of your compiler is part of the ABI hash. You can find it in the [debug output](#debug-output).
```

[DEBUG]   vcpkg-cmake|1b3dac4b9b0bcbef227c954b495174863feebe3900b2a6bdef0cd1cf04ca1213
[DEBUG]   vcpkg-cmake-wrapper.cmake|5d49ef2ee6448479c2aad0e5f732e2676eaba0411860f9bebabe6002d66f57d1
[DEBUG]   vcpkg.json|bc94e2540efabe36130a806381a001c57194e7de67454ab7ff1e30aa15e6ce23
[DEBUG]   vcpkg_copy_pdbs|d57e4f196c82dc562a9968c6155073094513c31e2de475694143d3aa47954b1c
[DEBUG]   vcpkg_fixup_pkgconfig|588d833ff057d3ca99c14616c7ecfb5948b5e2a9e4fc02517dceb8b803473457
[DEBUG]   vcpkg_from_git|8f27bff0d01c6d15a3e691758df52bfbb0b1b929da45c4ebba02ef76b54b1881
[DEBUG]   vcpkg_from_github|b743742296a114ea1b18ae99672e02f142c4eb2bef7f57d36c038bedbfb0502f
[DEBUG]   vcpkg_replace_string|d43c8699ce27e25d47367c970d1c546f6bc36b6df8fb0be0c3986eb5830bd4f1
[DEBUG] </abientries>
```

You might notice the `triplet_abi` entry has three hashes: the hash of the file content of the `x86-windows` triplet, the `windows.cmake` toolchain, and the compiler hash. Theses hashes would change if you decide to target a different platform.

### The hashes of the files used to build your library (`portfile.cmake`, `*.patch`, or `vcpkg.json`) change between runs

> This usually means the baseline of your libraries is not fixed. Frequently, the problem occurs when you clone the latest repository from vcpkg, which will pull in the updated baseline of libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This usually means the library version has changed. Frequently, this problem occurs when you clone the latest repository from vcpkg and have not pinned a baseline.
```

Possible solutions:

* (recommended) The copy of the vcpkg catalog must be pinned to a specific commit. When you run `git clone vcpkg`, make sure you run `git checkout [commit_id]` or add vcpkg as a submodule in your project. The reason is the ABI of a library is calculated based on the hashes of scripts and ports in the vcpkg repository. Pulling the latest changes will likely cause frequent rebuilds.
* Set `builtin-baseline` in your [vcpkg manifest](../reference/vcpkg-json.md#builtin-baseline).

> ### ABI hash of vcpkg CMake helper functions changes between runs

Reviewer: The phrasing style of these headers should be made consistent with the content:

> ABI hash of vcpkg CMake helper functions changes between runs

versus

> The hashes of the files used to build your library (`portfile.cmake`, `*.patch`, or `vcpkg.json`) change between runs

versus

> Failing to read from the binary cache

My suggestion is:
1. H2s should be phrased as imperatives: "Enable vcpkg debug output", "Troubleshoot read errors", "Troubleshoot write errors", "Troubleshoot hash mismatches"
2. H3s should be phrased as present simple actions: "The hash of builtin functions changes", "The `triplet_abi` hash changes", "The version of CMake or PowerShell changes"

Author: I've restructured the article and changed most of the headers, but I will leave this comment open. I want to make sure we agree on overall structure first.

Internal vcpkg helper functions like vcpkg_from_github, vcpkg_copy_pdbs, vcpkg_fixup_pkgconfig, etc. are used in the ABI calculation. If you are getting new ABI hashes for these ports, this is probably also caused by pulling the latest vcpkg repo. This issue will be addressed in a future update when these functions will be separately versioned.

Possible solutions:

* (recommended) The copy of the vcpkg catalog must be pinned to a specific commit. When you run `git clone vcpkg`, make sure you run `git checkout [commit_id]` or add vcpkg as a submodule in your project. The reason is the ABI of a library is calculated based on the hashes of scripts and ports in the vcpkg repository. Pulling the latest changes will likely cause frequent rebuilds.

> ### Version of CMake, PowerShell, or your compiler changes between runs

Reviewer: These should be split apart, since they (likely) come from different places. CMake and PowerShell are (often) controlled by the vcpkg tool and will change if you update vcpkg. Your compiler is entirely controlled by your triplet and from a diagnostic perspective is included in the `triplet_abi`, not as a raw version like `cmake`.

Author: Interesting, does vcpkg ignore system installed tools by default and install its own copy?

In these cases, vcpkg is behaving correctly. It is expected for toolchain changes to cause ABI hash changes as well. Rebuilds can be expensive, so we suggest the following:

* Continuous integration systems: Some systems such as GitHub Hosted Runners update the underlying image periodically. Updates may change your C/C++ compiler or CMake version, which will cause a rebuild. If possible, choose a versioned stable image.
* MSVC compiler updates: Major, minor and patch updates to the MSVC compiler will cause your library ABI hash to change. To minimize this, turn off automatic Visual Studio updates.

If the above options do not work, consider the following workarounds:

> * Use `vcpkg export` to package your libraries instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use [`vcpkg export`](../commands/export.md) to produce a standalone archive of your dependencies instead of restoring them from a manifest.
```

---
title: Troubleshoot binary caching issues
description: Troubleshooting guide for common binary caching issues
author: data-queue
ms.author: danshaw2
ms.date: 10/11/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
ms.topic: troubleshooting-general
---

# Binary caching troubleshooting guide

This guide is intended for users experiencing issues with [binary caching](./binarycaching.md).

## <a name="debug-output"></a> Enable vcpkg debugging information
When in debug mode, vcpkg outputs additional information, helping users to diagnose binary caching problems.

* [Classic mode](./classic-mode.md): add `--debug` to your command invocation.
* CMake toolchain: add `-DVCPKG_INSTALL_OPTIONS="--debug"` in your CMake configure call or in your `CMakePresets.json` file.

> * MSBuild/Visual Studio: set the property `VcpkgAdditionalInstallOptions` to `--debug`.

Author: good catch!

### Additional NuGet Resources
Consult the [NuGet documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/devops/artifacts/nuget/publish) for guidelines on connecting to and publishing on a NuGet feed.

## <a name="cache-upload"></a> Cache upload errors

[!INCLUDE [debug](../../includes/debug.md)]

You encounter errors uploading a binary package to your cache.

### Cause 1: Binary cache provider failed to upload

Uploads can fail for a variety of reasons, and error messages are usually provider specific.
* Ensure you are authenticated to your cache.  Different providers authenticate differently.
* Check if you've specified the correct URI for your cache.
* Refer to [push troubleshooting](#push-failure) if you are using NuGet as a binary source.
* Review documentation or the troubleshooting guide of your specific provider.

## <a name="empty-cache"></a> Empty binary cache

[!INCLUDE [debug](../../includes/debug.md)]

Although you encountered no errors and vcpkg installation was successful, the binary cache remains empty. If you observed errors, consult [push troubleshooting for NuGet](#push-failure) and [upload troubleshooting for other providers](#cache-upload).

> ### Cause 1: Vcpkg lacks write permissions to the binary cache

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Cause 1: vcpkg lacks write permissions to the binary cache
```

I think our convention is to leave vcpkg lowercase.

<!--
Steps to reproduce:
1. Create a NuGet feed
2. $env:VCPKG_BINARY_SOURCES="clear;nuget,C:/nugetfeed,read"
3. Run ./vcpkg install rapidjson
-->
You are missing the following message in your output.
```
Uploading binaries for 'rapidjson:x64-windows' to <binary source> source <url>.
Stored binaries in 1 destinations in 1.5 s.
```

> Vcpkg skipped uploading the binary package to your binary cache.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
vcpkg skipped uploading the binary package to your binary cache.
```

* Ensure your [binary cache configuration](binarycaching.md#configuration-syntax) is set to `write` or `readwrite`

## Libraries rebuild instead of using remote binary cache

[!INCLUDE [debug](../../includes/debug.md)]

Your system rebuilds libraries locally, even when the required binary package is available in the remote binary cache.

> There is the absence of the following output:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following message is missing in your output.

```
We should keep type of phrases consistent. By using consistent phrasing, readers can use them as markers to skip to the next instance of the phrase. A different suggestion would be to do something like:

> **Diagnose**: The following message is missing in your output.

```
Restored 1 package(s) from <remote binary cache> in 1.1 s. Use --debug to see more details.
```

> ### Cause 1: Vcpkg lacks read permissions from the remote binary cache

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Cause 1: vcpkg lacks read permissions from the remote binary cache
```

> Vcpkg choose to read your default binary cache over the remote one.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
vcpkg choose to read your default binary cache over the remote one.
```

* Consult the [ABI Hash mismatch troubleshooting guide](#abi-mismatch) to determine the root cause.

## Unexpected or frequent library rebuilds

[!INCLUDE [debug](../../includes/debug.md)]

In an unchanged environment and without updating vcpkg, you still find yourself rebuilding libraries occassionally.

### Cause 1: Undetected changes in the build environment

Each package in binary cache is labeled with an [ABI hash](./binarycaching.md#abi-hash) which contains compiler versions, sources, and other information to distinguish between binary packages. If the locally computed ABI hash doesn't match the one stored remotely, the package isn't retrieved.
* Consult the [ABI Hash mismatch troubleshooting guide](#abi-mismatch) to determine the root cause.

## <a name="abi-mismatch"></a> Troubleshooting ABI hash mismatch

[!INCLUDE [debug](../../includes/debug.md)]

This guide is intended for users to diagnose why they have different ABI hashes for two identically named binary packages.

> ### Comparing two binary packages

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Author: I'm in favor of keeping this to separate the sections. @vicroms thoughts?

Determining the difference between two identically named packages requires comparing various data: sources, tool versions, compilers, and target platforms. The [ABI hash](./binarycaching.md#abi-hash) provides a concise representation of this data. When calculating an ABI hash, vcpkg considers all relevant data, including file content, tool versions, and system details. It creates a hash for each data point and then combines these hashes into a single value for the binary package.

> #### Binary package ABI hash comparison

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Binary package ABI hash comparison
```

Author: @vicroms any thoughts?

The [ABI hash](./binarycaching.md#abi-hash) of the library zlib is `bb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87`:
```
[DEBUG] Trying to hash <path>\buildtrees\zlib\x86-windows.vcpkg_abi_info.txt
[DEBUG] <path>\buildtrees\zlib\x86-windows.vcpkg_abi_info.txt has hash bb1c96759ac96102b4b18215db138daedd3eb16c2cd3302ae7bffab2b643eb87
```

If the hash changes between runs for the same library, this indicates that the two packages are distinct.

> #### Compiler version ABI hash comparison

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Compiler version ABI hash comparison
```

Verify if the version of your compiler changed between runs.
```
[DEBUG] -- The C compiler identification is MSVC 19.36.32538.0
[DEBUG] -- The CXX compiler identification is MSVC 19.36.32538.0
[DEBUG] #COMPILER_HASH#f5d02a6542664cfbd4a38db478133cbb1a18f315
```
The compiler hash is `f5d02a6542664cfbd4a38db478133cbb1a18f315`.

> #### ABI Hash entry comparison

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### ABI Hash entry comparison
```
